# Privacy as Virtue
## Introduction

Van Der Sloot begins by depicting a world where individual rights can no longer be reasonably held as the locus contention when discussing privacy. Historically, we have always thought of privacy as an individual right. For example, wiretapping required targetting an individual, whose rights were protected by legal processes such as warrant requirements. 

In contrast, the impacts of big data systems cannot always be concieved in terms of how they relate to one person. Not even the benefits a corporation gains by collecting vast amounts of behavoiral data is contained in the profile of one person. Instead, they aggregate and perform statistical analysis on large numbers of profiles simultaneously, and use the outcomes to gain some kind of business advantage. The effects this process has on the individual is the consequence of the way businesses uses these systems in aggregate, often by categorizing people into groups based on inferred characteristics such as geolocation, age, and gender. Many such systems need not keep track of an individual's identity to be effective. Therefore, today's attempts to defend 'personal data' are not addressing the fundamental problem nor do they protect people from the dangers such systems can create.

> If a person is declined a loan because a bank has calculated that her neighborhood correlates with an increased risk of default, this clearly affects her (especially if this is done through a technique called red-lining). The same goes for a health insurer who demands a higher monthly payment because a person is part of a group (for example a lower educated, male, living in a low income neighborhood) which is more likely to have an unhealthy lifestyle. It also applies to states, secret service agencies or police authorities who decide to follow a person on the basis of the fact that she is a Muslim, traveled to Yemen recently and visits a mosque now and then. As it has been said, the effect on the individual was, is, and will remain of the greatest importance. But the current legal paradigm is relatively well-suited to address these kinds of problems, because it grants people an individual right not to be discriminated against and to go to court if their specific interests have been harmed. 
> 
> But the more general problem is difficult to address through the existing paradigm. The increased importance of group profiles, statistical correlations and data patterns raises concerns of an increased division between the rich and the poor, as these types of systems tend to benefit those in 'good' groups, while avoiding or limiting the claims of 'bad' groups (this is also called the Matthew effect). This negative effect can of course be brought down to the level of the individual, but in reality the problem is societal. pg. 5

Like Zuboff, Van Der Sloot also warns of *nudging and herding*, where an individual is coerced into a specfic kind of behavior as the result of a big data system. For example, widespread sensor data could detect traffic levels and push an automated vehicle through a different route than the individual originally expected. Or, a credit card company could sell data to a software company, who finds out that a person likes to purchase donuts on regular basis, and then the user is given a suggestion to install a weight loss app.

Current precedents are ill-equipped to handle the constant tension between the level where violations take place and where the legal remedies can be applied.

Although not much detail is given in the introduction, Van Der Sloot's *virtue ethics* shifts the conversation away from individual who is subject to abuse, toward the agent who is perpetuating it. 
> It lays down obligations that do not necessarily correlate with the rights of the patients. The focus on individual interests and harm and on subjective rights is complemented with the duties that an agent has to comply with irrespective of others' rights to compel her to do so. This means for example, that rules can be developed for handling nonpersonal data, metadata, and statistical data. Also, rules can be developed on the abuse of power by data controllers in order to affirm the principles of the rule of law. In addition to such minimum requirements, virtue ethics also involves on aspirations and goals: those aims that an agent must attempt to achieve. Accordingly, the regulation of privacy and data protection could not only aim at preventing abuse of power by states and companies, but also at stimulating the good use of power in relation to data processing. pg. 6-7