# The Future of Violence
## The Distribution of Offensive Capability

This chapter provides examples of existing and near-future technologies which give individual actors the ability to cause large-scale catastrophes. These examples could be implemented by either individual rogue actors, or relatively small groups of people. The threats can be categorized generally:

- Bioweapons, where an individual uses lab equipment to create a virus or other infectious agent. Such equipment could be used at work in a commercial setting, at a university in a research setting, and as time passes, lab equipment could be come more affordable for individuals to own. Advanced manipulations to viruses and other bioweapons will become easier to execute with less equipment and knowledge.
- Cyberspace (networked computers), where individuals can already mount sizeable infrastructure attacks (such as a distributed denial of service or DDOS) with minimal technical knowledge. Cyber attacks threaten software systems which control life-supporting technologies such as electrical grids, and also military equipment such as control systems for nuclear weapons. The recent expansion of cyberspace has created a vast domain of attack vectors, each of which is potentially exploitable by an individual rogue actor.
- Robotics, in which a person could piece together pre-manufactured components to create something unforseen and dangerous. Or, they might reprogram a fully operational unit to perform tasks outside its intended purpose. For example, a small army of drones with guns attached to them. Military drones could also be hacked and and used by nefarious actors. Another example in the book is "Metal Storm", which was created by a grocery store worker. It's a gun that uses electricy rather than gunpowder, which results in an astonishing rate of fire - up to 1 million rounds per minute.
- Nanotechnology, which is in early stage and not yet under the realm of 'mass empowerment.' Surveillance data, ripe for exploitation, will grow exponentially in size and detail. Manufacturing of virtually all goods will be radically changed as the technology develops, not only because of revolutionary new materials, but because constuction of components can be decentralized: Imagine a nanotechnology 'printer' which can create - atom by atom - all of your household goods from basic elements like carbon. This of course creates unprecedented risks for weapons manufacturing. Furthermore, nano-sized robots could be used in a 'swarm' to attack infrastructure or people.

Historically, these kinds of threats were executed in state-to-state attacks, because the capabilities were always too burdensome for individuals to create.