# The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
## Make Them Dance

Today's SC is motivated by the expansion of profits, and its primary use of behavioral data is to determine the products you are most likely to purchase. This data is sold to advertisers to help them spend marketing budgets on ads which are more effective.

In contrast, SC is becoming increasingly concerned not only with optimizing advertising, but with behavioral modification in general. This tenth chapter marks the turning point where Zuboff begins to unravel the cutting-edge science and technologies designed explicitly behavioral prediction and modification. Although profitability remains a top priority in SC, there are noteworthy techniques at play in later developments:

- *Tuning* involves queuing or nudging a user to follow a series of actions at a precise time and place.
- *Herding* involves controlling key aspects of a person's immediate context, and therefore forcing them to take a specific action. Disallowing a drunk person from starting their car (based on sensor data) would push the person out of the car toward purchasing a ride.
- *Conditioning* is a long-standing appraoch to modifying behavior, most often associated with Harvard Psychologist BF Skinner. By providing environmental conditions and reinforcements for specific sequences of behavoir, individuals can be modified to perform specific routines. Skinner called this manipulation *behavioral engineering* and the work of BF Skinner becomes a major part of section 3 in this book.

One controversial example of tuning was detailed in a 2012 article in *Nature*, where Facebook engineers had manipulatad 61 million individual news feeds in the run-up to the 2010 congressional election. 

> One group was shown a statement at the top of their news feed encouraging the user to vote. It included a link to polling place information, an actionable buttion reading "I Voted," a counter indicating how manyu other Facebook users reported voting, and up to six profile pictures of the user's Facebook friends who had already clicked the "I Voted" button. A second group received the same information but without the pictures of friends. A third control group did not receive any special message.
> 
> . . . Users who recieved the social message wer about 2 percent more likely to click on the "I Voted" button than those who received the information alone and 0.26 more likely to click on polling place information. Facebook experimenters determined that social messageing was an effective means of tuning behavior at scale because it "directly influenced political self-expression, information seeking and real-world voting behavior of millions of people," and they concluded that "showing familiar faces to users can dramatically improve the effectiveness of a mobilization message." (pg 299-300)

The section continues to outline a few more experiments and the defensive arguments made by the scientific community for this kind of research. Facebook, outside academic research, regularly and systematically conducts experiments on its news feed as per the extracton imperative and economies of action.

The argument against such research is that it violates Common Rule because it does not follow standard procedures for obtaining informed consent and allowing participants to opt-out. The defense is that the importance of behavioral knowledge from online media is important enough to justify an exception from tradtional research norms. And, even those who defend the Common Rule point out that even strict guidelines would do little to curb the behavior of such a large and powerful company (inevitability). Researchers and legal experts have largely agreed that Facebook and other companies would do everything possible to avoid the implementation of externally imposed guidelines and probably operate covertly if faced with regulation.





