# The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
## Two Species of Power

This chapter introduces the third and final section of the book, titled *Instrumentarian Power for a Third Modernity.* In this third section, Zuboff speculates the current trajectory of SC and, later, makes an argument for resistance.

The section begins with her formal definition of the key term *instrumentarian*:
> In parts I and II, we examined the conditions, mechanisms, and operation sthat construct this private knowledge kingdom and its lucrative preditioncs that evolve toward certainty in order to guarantee market players the outcomes that they seek. As I wrote in chapter 7, there can be no *guarantee* of outcomes without the power to make it so. This is the dark heart of SC: a new type of commerce that reimagines us through the lens of its own distictive power, mediated by its means of behavioral modification. What is this power, an dhow does it remake human nature for the sake of its lucrative certainties?
>
> As to this species of power, I name it *instrumentarianism,* defined as *the instrumentation and instrumentalization of behavior for the purposes of modification, prediction, monetization, and control.*  (pg 352)

This is quickly followed with a word of warning against conflating instrumentarianism with totalitarianism, often via the analogy to George Orwell's book *1984* and its Big Brother. Zuboff argues that like totalitarianism, instrumentarianism arises as historically unprecedented, and therefore beyond the scope of common terminology and often outside the conscious view of those who might resist. However, the scope, breath, and impact of instrumentarianism is very much on the same level as totalitarian was in the previous century.

> Totalitarianism was bent on the reconstruction of the human species through the dual mechanism of genocide and the "engineering of the soul." Instrumentarian power, as we shall see, takes us in a sharply deifferent direction. Surveillance capitalists have no interest in murder or the reformation of our souls. Although their aims are in many ways just as ambitious as those of totalitarian leaders, they are also utterly distinct.

Zuboff proceeds to detail the history of totalitarianism, and then abruptly turns to an analysis of the origins of instrumentarianism. Briefly (because this is covered extensively in later chapters), she begins her argument that instrumentarianism is rooted in a branch of psychology called "radical behaviorism" - specifically, the work of Max Meyer and later developed by BF Skinner. 

It is significant that Zuboff is intimately familiar with Skinner's work, because:
> Skinner spent most of his career in the Psychology Department at Harvard University, and some of my most vivid memories of graduate school are the times I spent with in in close debate. (pg 361)

While it may be tempting to brush Zuboff's later claims as conspiracy theories, her work does bring a significant amount of direct exerpience which carries a heavy weight.
