# The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
## Big Other and the Rise of Instrumentarian Power

Having established the term *instrumentarian* and started the conversation about its ambitions in the context of psychologists like BF Skinner, Zuboff uses this chapter to clarify more terminology and to to document some history of instrumentarianism.

> SC is the puppet master that imposes its will through the medium of the ubiquitous digital apparatus. I now name the apparatus *Big Other*: It is the sensate, computational, connected puppet that renders, monitors, computes, and modifies human behavior. *Big Other* combines these functions of knowing and doing to achieve a pervasive and unprecendented *means of behavrioral modification.* Surveillance capitalism's economic logic is directed through Big Other's vast capabilities to produce instrumentarian power, replacing the engineering of souls with the engineering of behavior. (pg 376)

The gaze of the Big Other imposes analysis in an inhuman and cold manner:
> Thanks to Big Other's capabilities, instrumentarian pwoer reduces human experience ot measureable observable behavior while remaining steadfastly indifferent to the meaning of that experience. I call this new way of knowing *radical indifference*. It is a form of *observation without witness* that yields the obvers of an intimiant violent political religion and bears an uterly different signature of havoc: the remote and abstracted contempt of impenetrably complex systems and the interests that author them, carrying individuals on a fast-moving current to the fulfillment of others' ends. (pg 377)

Big Other dehumanizes its subjects by imposing analysis upon them as if they were objects. Individuals are no more than organisms that behave under the system. Instrumentarian power leverages this distanced manuevering to secure guaranteed outcomes in the market and to expand its power.

Another key argument, raised several times, but fist here, is that instrumentarian power is welcomed by society because it fills a void of trust - trust which has been diminished between the government and its people, as well as people between one another. SC replaces this trust with certainty of outcomes - not just for markets, but outcomes for society itself.

One primary societal distrust capitalized by the instrumentarian narrative is the War on Terror. Returning again to *inevitability*, Zuboff explains that the War on Terror is continuously used to legitmize the rapid broadening and deepening of surveillance. Rather than rebuilding social relations within society (as if this is a possibility), the state prefers to expand its power to dominate social deviants through the lens of the Big Other. 

The remainder of the chapter presents numerous examples of the mutual relationship between the state's desire for social control of rogue behavior and the instrumentarian conquests implemented by surveillance capitalists. Toward the end of it, Zuboff begins her criticism of instrumentarian ideology. This will continue for much of the remainder of the book, but she starts off by explaining that this ideology is categorically *utopian* and therefore subject to the standard, associated criticism. 

Perhaps the most vivid example is a 2013 Microsoft patent titled "User Behavior Monitoring on a Computerized Device." 
> With conspicuously thin theory complimented by thick practice, the patented device is designed to monitor user behavior in order to preemptively detect "any deviation from normal or acceptable behavior tha tis likey to affect the user's mental state. A prediction model corresponding to features of one or more mental states may becompared wiht features based upon current user behavior." (pg 411-412)

Zuboff believes this software system is but a microcosm for the large-scale goals of instrumentarians at companies like Google, Microsoft, Facebook, and Amazon.