# The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
## The Instrumentarian Collective

Having painted the picture of SC and its mechanisms of power, and also having established its tremendous and unprecendented impacts today and in the near future, Zuboff proceeds to detail instrumentarian ideology. By examining specific work from individuals within the *instrumentarian collective*, Zuboff portrays the grandiose vision which is quickly coming to life around us.

Her first target is Alex Pentland, the director of the Human Dynamics lab within MIT's Media Lab. Pentland is not only a visionary, but an applied instrumentarianist, with hundreds of published articles, and an advisor to countless organizations including the World Economic Forum, Google, Nissan, and the Office of the United Nations Secretary General. His research lab is funded by a similarly impressive list of corporations and government organizations, perhaps most notably the Chinese government (which will be a topic of a full chapter later in the book). On top of this, he has graduated a small army of more than 50 doctoral students who have established themselves in influential roles in top universities, research groups, and of course corporations.

Having studied with BF Skinner herself, Zuboff emphasizes the similarity in the world view embodied by Pentland.
> Skinner bitterly lamented the absence of "instruments and methods" for the study of human behavior comparable to those available to physicists. As if in response, Pentland and his students have spent the last two decades determined to invent the instruments and methods that can transform all of human behavior, especially social behavior, into highly predictive math.

The chapter continues to detail Pentland's work as an example of instrumentarian ideology. These details are very interesting, and reading it, one is shocked by the sheer brazenness of Pentland's own statements.
> For the first time in history, the majority of humanity is linked . . . as a consequence, our mobile wireless infrastructure can be "reality mined" in order to . . . monitor our environments, and plan the deployment of our society. . . .Reality mining of the "digital breadcrumbs" left behand as we go about our daily lives offers potental for creating remarkable, second-by-second models of group dynamics and reactions over extended periods of time. . . In short, we now have the capacity to collect and analyze data about people with a breadth and depth that was previously inconceivable. (quoting Pentland on pg 428)

Pentland rejects categories like race, gender, and class in favor of 
> ". . . behavior patterns" that produce "behavior subgroups" and a new "behavior demographics" that can predict disease, financial risk, consumer preferences, and political views with "between 5 and 10 times the accuracy" of the standard measures. (pg 428)

Pentland is also open about his ideas for coercing subjects to participate in data collection activities. He is a huge advocate of an international agreement to encourage companies to allow users to 'own' the behavioral data collected from their devices. This is because when they retain ownership, they can recieve payment for its usage by the corporations who purchase it. This provides incentive for subjects to hand over increasingly vast and detailed data.

Briefly, Zuboff identifies the principles of instrumentarian ideology:

- Behavior for the greater good.
- Plans replace politics.
- Social pressure creates harmony.
- Individuality is dwarfed by collective outcomes.

