# The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
## The Right to Sanctuary

After a deep-dive into the psychological problems with social media addiction and instrumentarian manipulation during chapter 16, Zuboff proceeds to argue that people should have the right to existence outside 'the hive.'

She points out that every civilization in history has upheld a realm of sancutaury - an exit from the totality of state and law. In some cases this was the home, in others it was churches and temples, and up until fairly recently, it was at least theoretically possible to live 'off the grid' and 'on the land'. Even this isn't possible anymore, as the gaze of the Big Other extends beyond city limits with GPS and satellite imagery. 

According to psychologist Dahl Pedersen, privacy is
> ... a boundary control process that invokes the decision rights associated with restricting and seeking interaction. Pedersen's research identifies six categoires of privacy behaviors: solitude, isolation, anonymity, reserve, intimacy with friends, and intimacy with family. His study shows that these varied behaviors accomplish a rich array of ligical health and developmental success: contemplation, autonomy, rejuvenation, confiding, freedom, creativity, recovery, catharsis, and concealment. These are experiences without which we can neither flourish nor usefully contribute to our families, communities, and society.
> > >
> . . . Big Other outruns society and law in a self-authorized destruction of the right to sanctuary as it overwhels considerations of justice with its tactical mastery of shock and awe. The facts of SC's dominance of the division of learning, the unrepentant momentum of its dispossession cycle, the institutionalization of its means of behavior modification, the convergence of these with the requirements of social participation, and the manufacture of prediction products for trade in behavioral futures markets are de facto evidence of a new condition that has not been tamed by law. (pg 479)

One of the reasons privacy is eroded by instrumentarianism is because the boundary between physical and digital has been blurred. The home itself is now filled with more and more digital devices which relay information to Big Other in real time. Many of these gadgets record full coversations, others record video, and still others report behavioral patterns - but all of them fulfill the same goal via the dispossesion cycle.

The next section is a conversation about how the legal system has responded, or failed to respond, to the rise of SC. Because the fourth ammendment circumscribes the relationship between individuals and the state - rather than between individuals and corporations - American law is largely incapable of protecting us from the economic imperatives of SC.

Zuboff is more optimistic about the EU's 2018 General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). This is because it imposes many important requirements:

- Notification of individuals when data breaches occur.
- A higher standard for 'consent' when collecting personal data.
- A prohibition on making personal information public by default.
- A right to erasure of data.
- Protections against making automated decisions when considering situations which have 'consequential' impacts on an individual's life.
- Substantial fines for violations, which can reach up to 4% of a company's global revenue.
- Opportunity for class-action lawsuits by end users.
  
Although Zuboff celebrates this as a necessary step, she is skeptical that it can be used as a "springboard to challenging the legitimacy of SC and ultimately vanquishing its instrumentarian power." (pg 482) She proceeds to give some examples of the persistent difficulty individuals and governments face when asserting the rights outlined in the GDPR. Corporations are hesitant to give up data and when forced to, act slowly, oftentimes omitting large portions of relevant data or information regarding its usage.

Citing anthropologist Laura Nader, Zuboff emphasizes that although the law opens the space for empowerment against SC, legal changes are only pushed forward when citizens actively contest injustice, using the law as a means to higher purpose. And, despite the GDPR, companies like Google and Facebook have continued to thrive and rapidly expand in the EU. Like capitalism itself, SC is adaptive to new economic, social, and regulatory situations, which is perhaps the primary reason why capitalism itself stands as the world's prevailing economic system today.

